One day, I came home from school in a hurry. As I arrived at home, I immediately took a shower. Then, I went to my room and started reading books for the next day’s civic education exam. Fifteen minutes reading, the lights went down- blackouts. It was not a surprise since it was already the fourth time that month. That was the moment when I realized the urgency of Indonesia’s energy problem.
Indonesia’s energy problem has been highlighted in many news, talk shows, and even social media. The main idea of the problem is that Indonesia is still using fossil fuel as the main source of energy. With estimated 211,9 trillion spent each year for subsidizing fossil fuels and another 94 trillion for subsidizing electricity, there is a need to find a cheap source of energy. The problem increases in remote areas, such as remote islands. Constructing a diesel based generator to power electricity is difficult, not to mention the cost of distributing fuel to those areas. I believe that renewable energy is the solution, because it is long term, sustainable, and cheap.
Indonesia is known as the land of paradise. With plenty of natural resources, there are lots of potential for renewable energy. We have sun shining all year long, we have wave from our vast ocean, we have forest for potential biofuel and many more. The materials are there, we just need to find a way to get their maximum capabilities for the best result.
As the first step, we need to save as many energy as possible, because energy is expensive and takes lots of our nation’s national budget from the subsidy and we need the money for building renewable energy. One of the method that the government can use for raising awareness is through advertisements. The advertisement can be shown in television, radio, and social media as well. Most people use them all the time, so sending message through them will be an effective way. Right now, the advertisement is already there, but still in a low number. The government needs to make more advertisement about saving energy.
The next step is to have the human resources for supporting the renewable energy project. In order to make a solar cell or a wave turbine, we need a strong foundation in science and technology. Indonesia has lots of qualified people, but many of them choose to work abroad, not their fault, because our country today has not given enough attention and appreciation to people like them. The tough bureaucracy for science and technology makes scientist lose their spirit of making an invention. So as the second step, the government has to make the bureaucracy for science and technology easier, and give more attention to science and technology development.
According to renewable energy policy network report 2013, Indonesia ranks the third in generating electricity power from geothermal energy. With 1.3 GW produced, Indonesia traits only to the United States and the Philippines, however it leads Mexico, Italy, and even Japan. Despite the high ranking, it only contributes 1.1% of Indonesia’s total energy. The interesting fact is that 40% of the world’s geothermal lies beneath the surface of Indonesia, and right now, we are only using just 5% of its total potential. With such big potential, the government should give more attention by building more geothermal power station and supporting research in geothermal to unlock the full potential.
As the biggest archipelago nation in the world, our country has vast ocean territory. In the coastal places, there are waves, strong waves that can be used for generating energy. Wave powered electricity is the solution to the lack of electricity in remote islands of Indonesia. Once the facility is already built, it can power the island for a long time. The new technology in wave energy turbine is also fish safe, and it does not emit any pollution to the sea so the sea environment will not be damaged. According to Norwegian Government, wave power is really a potential of energy in Indonesia. We have only scratched the surface, and to make more wave powered turbine, the government should learn from other country that has already been successful in using wave power such as Norway and Great Britain.
Looking at Indonesia’s location in the equator, building a solar panel to use the energy from sun is a promising way. New invention of solar energy is made every day. It gets more efficient in collecting energy, either from a giant lens or through making a multilayered cell with different material each. Indonesia has many unoccupied empty field and landscape. Those vast areas can be a place for building as many solar panels as possible.
In years to come, Indonesia’s energy demand is expected to rise. I believe that renewable energy is the key to fulfill the demand and it will make Indonesia better in the future.
